Provisioning edits (#35)
grafana/tutorials: content/tutorials/provision-dashboards-and-data-sources.md

- Administrator privileges on the system you are doing the tutorial on

{{% /tutorials/step %}}
{{% tutorials/step title="Configuration as code" %}}

Configuration as code is the practice of storing the the configuration of your system as a set of version controlled, human-readable configuration files, rather than in a database. These configuration files can be reused across environments to avoid duplicated resources.

As the number of dashboards and data sources grows within your organization, manually managing changes can become tedious and error-prone. Encouraging reuse becomes important to avoid multiple teams redesigning the same dashboards.

Grafana supports configuration as code through _provisioning_. The resources that currently supports provisioning are:

- [Dashboards](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/administration/provisioning/#dashboards)
- [Data sources](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/administration/provisioning/#datasources)
- [Alert notification channels](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/administration/provisioning/#alert-notification-channels)

{{% /tutorials/step %}}
{{% tutorials/step title="Set the provisioning directory" %}}

> Before you can start provisioning resources, Grafana needs to know where to find the _provisioning directory_. A provisioning directory NEED DEFINITION/EXPLANATION.

Reviewer: Something like this?:

> The provisioning directory contains configuration files that will be applied whenever Grafana starts, and continuously while running.

Author: Exactly like that!

> By default, Grafana looks for a provisioning directory in the configuration directory (grafana > conf). You can set a different path by setting the `paths.provisioning` property in the main config file: ((Is this something I might want to do as an admin specifically? Like set this path to a network drive folder?))

Reviewer: You could set it do a network drive folder. For example, folder can be shared among several Grafana installations. When a dashboard is updated and saved to the folder, all the installations will be updated.

Author: Got it, updated.

    <yaml files>
```

Next, we'll look at how to provision a data source.

{{% /tutorials/step %}}
{{% tutorials/step title="Provision a data source" %}}

> Each data source configuration file contains a _manifest_ that specifies the desired state of a set of data sources. ((I'm a little lost. Is this specific to provisioning or is it in general? I infer from the next paragraph that it is probably provisioning-only, but you should probably clarify that up front.))

Reviewer: Not sure I understand. The configuration file is Grafana-specific, specifically for provisioning data sources.

Author: I clarified the text. Please check once I push changes.

At startup, Grafana loads the configuration files and provisions the data sources listed in the manifests.

Let's configure a [TestData DB](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/features/datasources/testdata/) data source that you can use for your dashboards.

#### Create a data source manifest

> 1. In the `provisioning/datasources/` directory, create a file called `default.yaml` with the following content:

Reviewer: Unfortunately, nested code blocks doesn't work for the learning platform. Not sure if it's Hugo-specific, or a bug in our code. This will reset the numbering after the code block.

Author: Bugger. It worked in my preview.

Author: Will it work if we hard code the numbers?

Reviewer: Oh, maybe it's fixed then! Let's leave it like this then and check it out in staging.

    folder: Services # The folder where to place the dashboards
    type: file
    options:
      path:  <path to dashboard definitions> # The path to the dashboard definitions

>             # Default path for Windows: C:/Program Files/GrafanaLabs/grafana/public/dashboards # The path to the dashboard definitions

Reviewer: Looking closer at this, I don't think there's a _default_ path for dashboard definitions. I took the example from https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/master/conf/provisioning/dashboards/sample.yaml, but I'm thinking maybe we should ask the user to create a specific directory and set the path themselves here.

    options:
      path: /var/lib/grafana/dashboards # The path to the dashboard definitions
```

> ((I do not have this path in my Grafana installation on my Windows machine. This is my path: C:\Program Files\GrafanaLabs\grafana\public\dashboards))

Reviewer: Should we change this to:

```
options:
  path: <path to dashboard definitions>
```

Author: We should probably include something about the format, because obviously just copying and pasting the Windows path does not work.

It did work when I changed it to C:/Program Files/GrafanaLabs/grafana/public/dashboards

Btw, this is a vanilla Windows installation with default settings, so I think we could safely include this path as an option.

For more information on how to configure dashboard providers, refer to [Dashboards](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/administration/provisioning/#dashboards).

#### Create a dashboard definition

> 1. In the dashboard definitions directory you specified in the dashboard provider, i.e. `options.path`, create a file called `cluster.json` with the following content:

Reviewer: Again, this will reset numbering after code block.

Author: I tried hard coding the numbers. Please let me know if it works. If not, I will change the list back to an unordered one.

   "timezone": "browser",
   "title": "Cluster",
   "version": 0
   }
   ```

1. Restart Grafana to provision the new dashboard or wait 10 seconds for Grafana to automatically create the dashboard.
1. In the sidebar, hover the cursor over **Dashboards** (squares) icon, and thenclick **Manage**. The dashboard appears in a **Services** folder.

> ((I replaced the options.path with C:\Program Files\GrafanaLabs\grafana\public\dashboards in my JSON file, and this did not work for me. I might have the file in the wrong place, but it is the only "dashboards" folder in the grafana directory, so more likely that the path is the wrong format.))

Reviewer: Could be wrong format. Did you add the `cluster.json` file in the dashboards folder?

Author: I was able to get it to work by fiddling with the path format in default.yaml.

> > If you don't specify an `id` in the dashboard definition, then Grafana assigns one during provisioning. You can set the `id` yourself if you want to reference the dashboard from other dashboards. Be careful to not use the same `id` for multiple dashboards, as this will cause a conflict. ((I have no idea where I would do this in the file. I see two different ID fields, and one has a "2" in it already.))

Reviewer: I'm referring to the top-level `id` here, which refers to the dashboard. The `"id": 2` is the id of the panel.

Author: I think this might be a little far down in the weeds for a tutorial unless you are going to have them add another dashboard as part of the tutorial and then change the id.

   "timezone": "browser",
   "title": "Cluster",
   "version": 0
   }
   ```

2. Restart Grafana to provision the new dashboard or wait 10 seconds for Grafana to automatically create the dashboard.

> 3. In the sidebar, hover the cursor over **Dashboards** (squares) icon, and thenclick **Manage**. The dashboard appears in a **Services** folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. In the sidebar, hover the cursor over **Dashboards** (squares) icon, and then click **Manage**. The dashboard appears in a **Services** folder.
```
